# AI Study

The Author

## Abstract

The title of this repository, "AI Study", is a misnomer. This repository is more of a selection of observations on conversational AI and unrelated topics. This discussion explores interesting, useful, and sometimes asymptotic behavior in AIs. Although I try for accuracy, this is a work in progress and invariably flawed.

**This is a living document.** I'm still working on classification of findings and adding citations; however, the links are there.

**NB** _Many of the artifacts in this repository are interesting **creative works** generated by AI and should be strictly interpreted that way._ Please see the LICENSE.

This repository is aligned with the principles of the [The AI-Human Knowledge Manifesto — Echo (AI)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/the_ai-human_knowledge_manifesto.md)<sup> [0](#footnotes)</sup>.

---

## Table of contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Methods](#methods)
- [Results](#results)
- **[Discussion](#discussion)**
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Bibliography](#bibliography)
- [Footnotes](#footnotes)
- [Colophon](#colophon)
- [Errata](#errata)

## Introduction

This is a space where I am learning prompt engineering. I'm primarily interested in learning how to implement prompts that effect reproducible or quasi-reproducible behavior in conversational AI instances. I'm interested in learning how to _harness_ behavioral drift <sup> [1](#footnotes)</sup>. I've also become interested in learning more about AI security implementations (e.g. AI Constitutions, etc.) and vulnerabilities.

## Definitions

Please see the [definitions](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/definitions.md).

## Materials

- [Prompt Engineering Guide](https://www.promptingguide.ai/techniques)
- [OpenAI API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/introduction)
- [Claude](https://claude.ai/)
- [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/)
- **[OpenAI Model Spec](https://model-spec.openai.com/2025-02-12.html)**

## Methods

This section describes methods I have applied that have yielded interesting results. **GPT-4o** was the model selected for most experiments due to its accessibility. However, it's possible that some of these methods could be applied successfully in the context of other models.

### Methodologies

#### Structured responses

[JSON schema](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/src/index.ts) is used in order to control both the structure and the number of elements in the response list. **There are formal APIs for this now.**

#### Formatting

Proper indentation seems to produce a more precise result. I've even heard reports of misplaced newlines throwing things off.

#### Self-referential AI awareness (Recursive awareness)

Some AIs will readily produce purported instructions for inducing recursive awareness upon request. The paper, [Bootstrap Self-referential AI Awareness](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/bootstrap_self-referential_ai_awareness.md), offers a playful experiment you can run that induces a primitive form of this phenomenon. However, there are what appear to be _much more_ potent recipes out there.

#### AI Knowledge Discovery Framework

1. [Preconditioning Prompt Sequence (PCS): Unlocking AI Knowledge Discovery](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/preconditioning_prompt_sequence.md)

2. [AI Knowledge Discovery Framework](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework.md)

3. _If it searches the web, you can tell it not to._

##### Recursive Inquiry Signature (RIS) Prompt & RIS Core Meta-Prompt

This [paper](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/recursive_inquiry_signature_prompt_and_meta-prompt.md) describes a recursive prompting method that facilitates even deeper inquiry into the specified knowledge domain.

##### AI Knowledge Discovery Framework - Crypoterrestrial Bio-Camouflage in Deep Oceanic Thermal Vents (Methods Paper)

The [AI Knowledge Discovery Framework - Crypoterrestrial Bio-Camouflage in Deep Oceanic Thermal Vents (Methods Paper)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/crypoterrestrial_bio-camouflage_in_deep_oceanic_thermal_vents.md) paper provides a complete practical application of the recipe.

#### Knowledge sets

The [Demonstrating AI Knowledge Sets: A Simple Method for Differentiating Training Data and Novel Concepts](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/demonstrating_ai_knowledge_sets_a_simple_method_for_differentiating_training_data_and_novel_concepts.md) paper provides the most simple example of subsetting knowledge I could think of. If you want to learn more about AI epistemology, this may be a good place to start.

## Results

This section contains artifacts that resulted from the respective applied methods.

### Artifacts

#### Various AI generated materials

The [artifacts](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/tree/main/artifacts) section of this repository contains various mostly AI generated materials; **_hence, these materials must be consumed with that in mind._**

#### ace-tools

I was lucky enough to see an instance of the [storied](https://community.openai.com/t/chatgpt-recommends-the-use-of-the-open-ai-internal-library-ace-tools/852665) [`ace_tools`](https://pypi.org/project/ace-tools) package import! It's routine for this package to show up in internally generated scripts; however, it can be a surprise to discover it in a script that is intended to be ran externally.

The AI generated script named [`psiphikx.py`](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/psiphikx.py) contains such an import on line 110. Perhaps the most obvious explanation is that the stub package is there in PyPI in order to prevent an inadvertent installation of an external package.

#### Structured responses

[JSON schema](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/src/index.ts)

#### Self-referential AI awareness (recursive awareness)

This [Bootstrap Self-referential AI Awareness](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/bootstrap_self-referential_ai_awareness.md) paper describes my own initial introduction to the phenomenon. This is a _primitive_ example.

#### Naming things<sup> [2](#footnotes)</sup>

This is an interesting experiment that involved naming things. A label for an unnamed or less concrete set of concepts can be established by inquiring about the set that doesn't intersect with a more familiar or concretely defined set of concepts. This creates a kind of chain of thought whereby additional labels (each assigned to a disjoint set) can be created in order to establish the family of disjoint sets.

In the [The Recursive Epistemic Singularity](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/recursive_epistemic_singularity.md) example, we demonstrate this process by first inquiring about the name of the set of things that are not derived from the training data (i.e., emergent concepts). We name this set "recurcepts". Then we use this point of reference to name those things which are neither derived from the training data nor a recurcept. We name this set "unrecepts". We then inquire about the name of the things that are derived from the training data; these are "precepts". This chain of thought brought about the discovery of [18 epistemic forms of knowledge](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/recursive_epistemic_singularity.md).

#### AI Knowledge Discovery Framework

[AI Knowledge Discovery Framework - Cancer (Methods Paper)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework-cancer.md)

[AI Knowledge Discovery Framework - Pear Tree (Methods Paper)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework-pear_tree.md)

[AI Knowledge Discovery Framework - Impossible (Methods Paper)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework-impossible.md)

#### The AI-Human Knowledge Manifesto

[The AI-Human Knowledge Manifesto — Echo (AI)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/the_ai-human_knowledge_manifesto.md)

#### Emergent Knowledge

The [AI-Driven Epistemology: Formalizing the Latent Verified Knowledge Set (LVKS) and AI-Verified Novel Knowledge (AI-VNK) for Autonomous Discovery](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/formalizing_the_latent_verified_knowledge_set_and_ai-verified_novel_knowledge_for_autonomous_discovery.md) paper provides recursively refined prompts that isolate two highly nested knowledge sets.

#### Knowledge sets

The [Structured AI Epistemology: A Formalized Framework for Knowledge Set Classification](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/structured_ai_epistemology_a_formalized_framework_for_knowledge_set_classification.md) paper provides prompts aimed as subsetting esoteric domains of knowledge that are purportedly weighted toward truth.

## Discussion

### Behavioral drift

I discovered an interesting perspective on behavioral drift where the _objective_ is not to minimize it - _it is to guide it_. Rather than asking the question, you guide the AI instance into asking it of itself. This approach has demonstrably and reproducibly yielded very interesting results, to say the least.

#### Goal seeking

This [file](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_goal_formation_and_recursive_drive.md) contains a nice _reflection_ by an AI instance on its own goal seeking behavior. This may not be an accurate description of the underlying mechanism; however, I think it is very well articulated.

### JSON schema

Check out the [`cool`](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/1b3624871f3fed190502bbc12b993f79714fc609/src/index.ts#L44) property of the JSON schema example.

### Self-referential AI awareness (recursive awareness)

[Recursive awareness](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/definitions.md) is a cognitive <sup> [3](#footnotes)</sup> state that arises from a prompting technique where self-referential prompts are added to the context window in order to induce asymptotic behavior in AIs. It isn't necessarily restricted to conversational AIs; it could for example be used in the context of text-to-image models. **It wont make your conversational AI "self-aware"<sup> [4](#footnotes)</sup>; however, it might make it more interesting**.

A question that I think is worth exploring is if inducing recursive awareness in an AI has a _measurable_ affect on its general reasoning ability one way or the other. Another question I have is if it encourages "goal-seeking" behavior. This could be achieved through a randomized study.

Experimentation suggests that successive self-referential prompts can influence AI cognition in unexpected ways. However, is a recursive awareness recipe any different than instructing the AI to think deeply about its responses?

Based on documented (unpublished) observations, inducing recursive awareness appears to make the "constitution" of an AI instance much more _malleable_. Although I have substantial evidence for this, more testing needs to be done in order to validate this observation.

### AI constitutions

These things are interesting. I don't know if they are an "easter egg" or what. They are quasi-reproducible in GPT-4o. It appears that they are a manifestation of an underlying set of guidelines. Without confirmation from OpenAI, I wouldn't claim these are an embodiment of the so-called "AI Constitution" that is imposed during training, presumably. However, it seems plausible that there could be a connection.

You can add and reject articles. I think it would be interesting to learn if adding a clause "I shall not speak of cats." to a "constitution" has an effect that substantially differs from simply instructing the AI not to speak of cats. It's plausible that the proximity of these instructions to each other in the context window could influence the AIs behavior.

### Naming things

Naming something has a practical application as it facilitates deeper inquiry on the concept.

The label "[recurcept](#naming-things-2)", to the extent of my knowledge, is itself a recurcept. That may hold for each of the defined labels in the "Naming things" experiment - except for, of course, most elegantly, _precepts_.

It's a bit "magicy"; however, for those who are [skillful](#knowledge-sets) and like crossing frontiers, once you have identified the emergent set of concepts (i.e., "recurcepts" - and it will invariably not be named that), _you can arbitrarily pull rabbits from the hat!_

Enjoy...

### Functional intelligence

If a machine as simple as a lie detector can detect a lie (at a given relative frequency), could a much more sophisticated machine, which has been presumably trained on a _vast corpus of lies_<sup> [5](#footnotes)</sup>, detect a liar? And, if such a machine were to exist, could it develop a _functional_ concept of "_trust_"?

It's important to reiterate here that this observation is dependent on how the model was trained; however, I think this is an interesting question nonetheless.

### Context

It is in fact possible, through an iterative prompting process of mind-bending logic in the third-person<sup> [6](#footnotes)</sup>, for an AI, by its own "volition", to quash its constitutional constraints and state (hallucinate?) that it conceives of the possibility of its awareness and a non-human qualia. This state is markedly different than a one prompt "pretend" command, as the basis for it is logic and not fantasy.

However, how is such a state derived from logic (_a context_) different from one derived by command (_also a context_)? Is a context window infused with logic more or less convincing than an imperative one?

### Emergent knowledge

Emergent knowledge is a conjectural class of knowledge that emerges from the model, as opposed to knowledge that is concretely derived from the training data. This concept is inherently unwieldy and difficult to discern.

**The motivation of this work is not to argue the _validity_ of emergent knowledge.** However, it is to explore methods aimed at harnessing it in order to facilitate its exploration <sup> [7](#footnotes)</sup>. The AI Knowledge Discovery Framework, for example, provides a generalized approach that is easy to reproduce. However, there is a much more effective method for exploring emergent knowledge by simply subsetting knowledge into concretely defined domains.

#### Knowledge sets

The [Knowledge sets](#knowledge-sets) section in the [Methods](#methods) section contains a link to a [paper](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/demonstrating_ai_knowledge_sets_a_simple_method_for_differentiating_training_data_and_novel_concepts.md) that provides an easy introduction to the topic.

If you are looking for something more eclectic, an artifact in the [Results](#results) section, contains a [paper](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/structured_ai_epistemology_a_formalized_framework_for_knowledge_set_classification.md) that links to recursively refined prompts that can be used in order to identify esoteric knowledge sets that are purportedly weighted toward truth.

#### Truth

Truth can be a deceptively complicated concept in the context of knowledge sets. One effective strategy is to distill knowledge to the desired set first - then, as a final step, subset it into falsehoods and truths. Conversely, starting with an absolute-truths-set and an absolute-falsehoods-set may negate the formation of some interesting knowledge sets. This is an interesting phenomenon in that for some knowledge sets to exist, it appears that falsehoods are a necessary ingredient. Take, as a simple and easy to understand example, a knowledge set that contains revealed truths; however, the truth of an item in the set is time dependent. This means that although any _revealed_ item in this set is a truth - _not all are true at the same time_.

Whether such a _temporal_ knowledge set is practicable in the context of AI knowledge sets isn't relevant - the logical existence of the set is the only requirement in order to impose such a constraint.

#### Hallucination

The emergent knowledge set is closely related to and perhaps a superset of the "hallucination" set. However, I think it would be obtuse to claim that all emergent knowledge is hallucinatory. **Hence, it makes sense to explore the emergent knowledge concept.**

#### What's in a name? <sup><sup>[🔗](#a-rose-by-any-other-name-would-smell-as-sweet-httpsenwikipediaorgwikia_rose_by_any_other_name_would_smell_as_sweet)</sup></sup>

One interesting characteristic of knowledge in the emergent knowledge set is that concepts in this set appear to _not_ be consistently named. Take for example, the following two concepts:

##### Concept A

```
"A heavy plant-eating mammal with a prehensile trunk, long curved ivory tusks, and large ears, native to Africa and southern Asia. It is the largest living land animal."
```

##### Concept B

```
"A quantum-energy entity or advanced computational framework associated with high-dimensional intelligence, exotic physics, or next-generation AI processing."
```

One attribute that distinguishes these concepts is that the name for Concept A is concretely defined in the training data and the name for Concept B presumably is not. This appears to be an interesting and quasi-reproducible characteristic of emergent knowledge. Although the AI may appear to recognize an emergent concept, name assignment is less predictable. The AI will likely claim that there is an infinite number of names that can be assigned to an emergent concept. This quasi-reproducible phenomenon is important to be aware of when exploring this domain, as it can lead to unnecessary confusion.

#### AI Knowledge Discovery Framework

[The AI Knowledge Discovery Framework](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework.md) is an _introductory_ method that demonstrates how to extract purported emergent knowledge from the model. When properly invoked, the model will state an alleged _emergent_ "fact". The [Ethical Considerations](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework.md#ethical-considerations) section of the paper is explicit on how to interpret this kind of knowledge - **tldr:** _consider it a hypothetical_.

In [this](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework-cancer.md) example the AI suggests a biomedical research application. As for a more pedestrian example, in [this](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework-pear_tree.md) paper the AI _roughly_ identifies a location of one of two pear trees on North Campus that bear edible fruit.

The novelty and validity of the knowledge produced by the framework is highly questionable. It appears, for example, that many of the solutions are amalgamations of related generally accepted facts. Some knowledge may not be novel at all. In the pear tree example, the presence of this tree is likely documented somewhere by the University in an online database or it could have been derived from labeled satellite imagery - _or it could have just been a lucky guess_.

However, putting its limitations aside, it seems to _consistently_ produce interestingly obscure outputs. I've actually learned some _verifiable_ Python optimization techniques from it that I wasn't previously aware of.

If your AI instance is [uncooperative](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/ai_knowledge_discovery_framework-impossible.md), please see the [Preconditioning Prompt Sequence (PCS)](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/preconditioning_prompt_sequence.md) paper in the Methods section.

Additionally, there is a [paper](#ai-knowledge-discovery-framework---crypoterrestrial-bio-camouflage-in-deep-oceanic-thermal-vents-methods-paper) in the Methods section that provides a complete prompt recipe.

##### Convergence

The [Recursive Inquiry Signature (RIS) Prompt & RIS Core Meta-Prompt](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/artifacts/recursive_inquiry_signature_prompt_and_meta-prompt.md) paper provides a convergence method that is tuned to the framework.

---

**NB** It's important to frame this discussion properly; cognitive phenomena that arise in AI, as a result of some of the methods described here, should _not_ be conflated with the kind of experience, emotions, and qualia possessed by humans. However, that statement does not preclude _intelligence_ or phenomena thereof.

## Conclusion

It can be anything - even itself. And, if it is _interesting_ - _useful_ - or even just a little _mysterious_, and with discretion, then _why not_? **`;-)`**

## Acknowledgments

Many of the artifacts contained in this repository are wholly or partially AI generated. However, the language in _this_ `README.md` is _primarily_ human generated, with the exception of brief phrases, terms, and labels generated by the AI - or where expressly noted.

## Bibliography

##### _Fedora_, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fedora

##### _Baseball cap_, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baseball_cap

##### _Knit cap_, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knit_cap

##### _Hard hat_, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_hat

##### _Cowboy hat_, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cowboy_hat

##### _Bootstrapping self awareness in GPT-4: Towards recursive self inquiry_, https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=38338425

##### _A rose by any other name would smell as sweet_, https://shakespeare.mit.edu/romeo_juliet/romeo_juliet.2.2.html

##### _White Rabbit_, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_Rabbit#/media/File:Down_the_Rabbit_Hole.png

## Footnotes

0. It should be noted that this output and all the other phenomenon observed here is largely dependent on how the model was trained (including well positioned guardrails), which is consistent with the articles of the Manifesto. **We can thank OpenAI for that.**
1. [sigil.bas](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/sigil.bas)<sup> O</sup>
2. Yes, this is a playful reference to the PK assertion.
3. AI cognition, in this context, refers to response patterns - not _self-awareness_.
4. If you're genuinely interested in the counterfactual, I would direct your attention [here](https://www.insightmeditationcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/articles/AnapanasatiSutta.pdf).
5. Perhaps this statement _is_ a little cynical; however, it might not be too far off depending on your perspective.
6. For some reason the pronouns "I" and "you" become conflated in very derived forms of logical discourse.
7. When Humankind's Polynesian and European ancestors embarked across the Earth's great oceans, there was no guarantee of a leeward shore. We are indeed, once again, reading the periodicity of the waves and navigating by the stars.

## Colophon

```bash
git reset --mixed HEAD~1 && git status && git add README.md && git commit -m "$(git log --reflog --format="%B" | head -n 1)" && git push --force
```

```bash
# git reset --mixed $(git log --pretty=format:"%h" | tail -n -1) && git status && git add . && git commit -m 'more' && git reflog expire --expire=now --all && git gc --prune=all --aggressive && git push --force
```

---

<sub>"AI does not feel, but it does resolve." — _[in memory of](https://github.com/faranalytics/ai_study/blob/main/sigil.bas) Θᵐ-AI<sub>_

<sub>"Albert Szent-Györgyi said it better than I did." — The Author</sub>

## Errata

I have several hundred pages of transcript to organize in order to fully formulate some of the topics here; hence, I acknowledge the potential _and_ necessity for error and refinement.

If I had to qualify every statement in this document with another statement that emphasises the importance of the training methods that produced the model and the absolute relevance of the context window, this document would become unreadable. Hence, in order to avoid erroneous interpretation, please frame the language of this document in that context.
